Hey folks, I'm taking this
episode to advertise for other
podcasts. If you enjoy stories
about the people behind the
technology that we use, you
should check out the greater
than code podcast. They focus
on the human side of
software development with stories of
diversity and inclusion, accessibility from
people that you don't normally
hear from search for greater
than code in your favorite
podcast app, or check out
greater than code.com. Hi, this
is Scott Hanselman. This is
Hansel mint today. I'm talking
with dr. Frazier shin engineering,
The manager at Intel corporation,
and you worked on the
space shuttle. You've done it.
You have got the most
amazing LinkedIn. I am just
enjoying reading your LinkedIn and
that is not something I
can say about everybody. Oh,
well, thank you, Scott. I
appreciate it. Thank you very
much for having me on.
No, it's absolutely my pleasure.
It must be pretty exciting
to get to work on
kind of two of the
main technological improvements of the
20th and early 21st century,
the space shuttle and then
semiconductor. Yeah. Yeah. Most definitely.
I can't lie. I pretty
much won the lottery in
that regard and working for
the most complex technical challenges
that human kind is working
on. You know, I think
the spatial itself was a
call, one of the most
complex, you know, engineering efforts
at the time, you know,
and then now you have
semiconductors with the lower complexity
it gets to, as you
get smaller and smaller and
then supercomputers themselves or, or
entire systems that have complexity,
you know, approaching, but not
quite that level, but you
know, getting close closer to
things like aerospace or medical
or stuff like that. So,
yeah, it's really, really cool.
So your undergrad is an
aerospace engineering and then your
master's was in mechanical engineering
with a specialization on thermal
and fluid sciences. And then
you got a PhD in
mechanical engineering is mechanical engineering.
It's a pretty big wide
open field. Do you have
a specialization within mechanical engineering?
Yeah, I would say my
specialization for like a master's
level was more of the
shock waves looking at heat
transfer, particularly heat transfer, and
the shock shock to test
apparatus is it long test
times, which we use to
characterize chemical reactions over a
certain period of time to
see what the, the derivative
chemical reactions are. And then
as I got to my
doctorate, my specialization was on
the combustion side of salt,
rocket propellant, specifically at the
modeling of them with nano
catalytic additives. So I've got
your thesis open here and
I, I read it to
the best of my community
college degree. And one of
the things that struck me
is that you're exploring how
perchlorate Behaves and is the
goal here to make it
burn hotter and faster and
increased the rate of the
burn so that it has
more explosiveness and then takes
the space shuttle up faster.
Yeah. And, you know, for
the special or program, they
have their special blend, which
is fairly standard with ammonia
perchlorate and the, the know
iron oxides and, you know,
a little bit of aluminum
to help train it and
then their, their, their fuel.
But in the case of
what we were studying in
that research is use a
lot for things like maybe
missile research, you know, where
you have certain rockets or,
you know, some sort of
propel body with a solid
propellant. And you're, you're trying
to get to perform in
certain regimes where maybe it
has a very high burn
rate, like really fast, like
you were saying, but I
can get, you know, make
to a target faster or
something of that nature. Or
sometimes you may want to
see what the effect of
a nano attitude could be
some metal oxide to maybe
make it burn longer over
a longer period of time
or maybe slower. And then
there's other regimes that get
very interesting, like Mesa burning,
where it maybe it'll burn
really fast and hot and
they kind of flatten out
in his burn rate and
then maybe the decrease or
an intermittent situation where it
burns hot and fast. And
then suddenly it kind of
stops for a second because
of maybe some of the,
the, how, the way that
geometry is changing or some
of the, the way that
the fluid properties are working
on the propeller ads is
actually burning it. So it
kind of stops for a
second and it starts again.
So these are all different
things that the military uses
for whatever application they may
be using it for the,
which I would not know,
but they find it interesting
indeed. Well, I think we've
all been at a cookout
or at a campfire and
we've burned a wood and
then sprayed it with something
we shouldn't have had it
shouldn't have sprayed it with
like an accelerant to go
in, you know, make the
barbecue go faster. But mostly
that just kind of makes
the fire go. And then
we go, wow, that was
interesting. But, but you're describing
not just how things burn,
but how they burn over
time with, and I assume
the goal is to be
able to have control, right?
You don't want to just
light something on fire and
then just hope for the
best. Exactly. You pretty much
nailed in, in a much
simpler explanation in novice providing
earlier. It's, it's, they're, they're
looking for a way to
control the burn rate because
the thing about a solid
propellant versus a liquid one,
like you were just describing,
you know, in a fire
and you squirt, you know,
gasoline or something on it,
you know, that's control you
throttled that by, you know,
how much you're squeezing and
pressing or whatever the case
may be, right? Much like
the solid space shuttles, external
tank with the liquid propellant
that that comes through, but
a solid propel it once
you like that, it's pretty
much going, you know, you
can't really stop it until
it pretty much burns out.
And so the idea is
how do we control the
burn rate of a solid
propellant in a rocket, but
at the same time have,
do do so with just
whatever the propellant itself is
or the properties or the
design is shaped with a
motor itself without having to
actually introduce any other mechanisms
that can try to, you
know, fucking motor design or
stuff like that to control
the brain rate or some
unique device  is solid
propellant in a rocket solid
because we want it to
be very dense and have
more like, you know, the,
the amount of space that
it occupies versus the amount
of potential power that it
represents, or why is it
solid? Why isn't it just
liquid? Yeah. Well, there's multiple
reasons. There's what you can
pack into it, the density
like you were saying, but
there's also a shelf life.
So when you have a
solid repellent, in fact, a
good example is your airbags
in your car, right? How
it deploys quickly and fast,
you know, when an accident
happens and the little igniter,
you know, goes off that
causes the gut to burn
very fast and it fill
up the air back with
all the expunged gases, that
ability to store that, that
propellant somewhere on the shelf
for years at a time,
and then have it still
work as part of the
benefit. Oh my goodness. How
do people practice this though?
If you've got something that's
burning it, I don't know,
1400 Kelvin, how do you
experiment with this? And how
are the people who did
the experiments? Not all dead.
Great question, very carefully. It's,
it's amazing. Even, even as
a, a, a, you know,
a college student you're going
through, you know, alcohol, tobacco
and firearms training, you know,
about how to handle this
stuff. Right. Really. Yeah. In
fact, there's, you know, sidebar,
whenever you get a chance,
maybe Google Petco disaster, but
Petco was a place that
was a chemical plant that
had ammonia perchlorate stored within
his various, you know, storage
areas. And it didn't do
a good job of keeping
it clean. And so there
was like, you know, particulate
dust of ammonia perchlorate around.
Plus they had lots of
canisters and containers underneath a
lot of pressure and ammonia
perchlorate That was in 1998.
And the thing that was
interesting about it was, it
was one of only two
places in America that would
produce ammonium perchlorate right. And
you'd think that if they're
making it, they would know
how not to break it.
And in fact, two people
died and it costs almost
$200 million in property damage. Horrible,
horrible thing. Yeah, Yeah, yeah.
Wow. Yeah. You recall way
more, but at night I
try to do my research
when I have PhD's on
the show. Yeah. And it
was just amazing because of
what they, I won't say
they forgot. I'm sure they
didn't forget this, but, you
know, there was probably a
degree of, I dunno, vigilance
in, in safety that maybe
just wasn't followed, but, you
know, ammonia for Clery, it's
just, it's really its own
fuel and oxidizer, and under
a high enough pressure as
experiences, you know, enough temperature
such that it could start
to undergo, you know, this
gasification that will lead to
a combust combustion event. And
so going back to, you
know, us now as students,
you know, we had the
ammonium perchlorate, it is, we
actually had to wear light
lab coats and EMI, or
an EMI electromagnetic discharge, static
discharge. I can remember it's
not any of mine. It's
another acronym is escaping me
right now. We have to
wear special shoes, which are
made by converse. I believe
if I recall. So that
was Ascot. Cool. We got
wear converse sneakers that were
for like being in the
lab, but we had to
wear these special shoes to
make sure we didn't have
any electrical discharge that would
happen and possibly, you know,
make the ammonium perchlorate go
off. We actually had the
lab when it was constructed.
And this is at Texas
a and M at the
turbo machinery lab, just to
get them a, a bit
of a shout. We actually
had to construct the lab
and we had to build
in steel, you know, rebar.
And we actually had a
test cell so that all
the diagnostic, you know, work
that happened on the computer,
taking in the data from
the, the rise in pressure
and temperature, while we would
have the propellant within a,
what we call a strand
bomb, all of that was
behind these reinforced walls, such
that if something did happen,
it wouldn't endanger us. Yeah.
So it was, it was,
it was pretty nice. And
it was funny. We actually
had shock tube testing going
on next door where we
were doing other chemical kinetics
experiments. So it was like,
Hey, you know, there was
a lot of reinforcement going
on, but yeah, it's, it's
a lot of safety protocols,
a lot of making sure
that you're not carrying things
forward and back, and that
you have no static charge
on your body. In some
ways, you know, often we
probably viewed it as overkill
a little bit, but you
know, the smallest thing could
happen. And when that happened,
you know, it, look, you
look back on it and
say, okay, take every precaution
that we need to. Yeah.
Safety first, those, those shoes
are ESD shoes, electrostatic shoes.
Yeah. Those are no joke.
It's not just your regular
old shoes. You gotta make
sure that they right. They
have to let that electricity
go into the ground. Right.
You're basically grounding yourself. Yep.
Exactly. In fact, you know,
you had a little tag
and you stick the tech
actually, until I was kind
of the same thing for
the folks who go in
and test the, the different,
the quality of the Silicon
and everything, and run it
through its validation. Now you
made a comment a few
paragraphs ago where you said
that, that the, this ammonia
perchlorate is its own, it's
a fuel and an oxidizer,
but then your, your PhD
thesis talks about these additives,
these nano additives. So I
know nano means small, what
kind of small things are
we adding? That's going to
make it better than it
already is. Yeah. So at
the time, I'm not sure
where the research is now,
but at the time we
were adding metal oxides. So
things like Syria or titanium
or titanium oxide, like tiny
pieces of metal. Exactly. Yeah.
And bonded with oxygen. And
basically, you know, these tiny
pieces of metal, the smaller,
smaller you can get, it
creates more of a reaction
site cause you've increased the
surface area upon which different
chemical reactions can occur. Yeah.
So that's, that's the idea
of using these, these metal
oxides that the metal piece,
and this is probably going
a little bit super in
depth into a level of
chemistry that I don't have,
but you know, the, the,
the metals probably have some
sort of electron level behavior
that helps stimulate chemical reactions
or effectively when, especially when
combined with the, the oxygen,
but the, the size of
these particles are what enable
them to be effective because
when you're able to get
more into the, the chemical
composition of the solid propellant,
but then you've got so
many of them around, why
is it creating more reactions?
I just liked almost. Oh
yeah. Because like I was
saying before you, you increase
your surface area. So now
you've got more space available
upon which to actually have
like a cool reaction, which
helps stimulate the, the rate,
the combustion reaction of the
propellant, Hey friends, you know
how I love great podcasts.
And I want you to
check out the code newbie
podcasts, all about stories from
folks on their coding journey.
They talked to new developers,
experienced developers and everyone in
between about how they got
started learning to code how
they navigate their technical careers.
And they also do deep
dives into technical topics in
a newbie friendly way, check
out their podcast at www
dot code newbie. That's any
w D I e.org/podcast. That's
code newbie.org/podcast. So you bring
up a really interesting question.
So for those of us
that are like regular people,
we kind of mythologize PhDs.
Like it's just an amazing
thing that you have such
a deep specialization in a
thing, but that you just,
for example said, well, that,
but that goes farther into
chemistry than your PhD goes
when that's kind of cool.
Like, I just assume you
all know everything, but you're
saying that there's a specialization.
Do you then work side
by side with like, with
a, with a, with a
chemistry PhD, and then they,
they, they reached their limit
and then they find a
material sciences, PhD, and then
you all work together. That's
Pretty much it. In fact,
when I was doing my
research, there was a, I'm
a material scientist over at
university of central Florida that
we were working with. And,
you know, and he was
able to look at what
we call it, the agglomeration.
And basically that's when you're
creating these nanoparticles, you know,
like anything in nature, whether
it's, you know, all, no
rocks and space, they're trying
to come together to form
planets or something else. When
it, when you're trying to
make something super small, it'll
want to have a desire
to come together with other
things, right. And make it
a little bit bigger, but
you don't want that because
the larger you size, you
get the less reaction sites
you have. So with his
material science background, he was
able to put these nanoparticles
through the various, you know,
processes to actually make them
small enough. So they wouldn't
agglomerate or come back together.
And so it was his
expertise and his know how,
as a chemist in wherever
the machines and the processes
that he was using to
actually create these particles at
as fine a size as
we were looking for. So
let me shift the conversation
because we, you and I
met when we were volunteering
to teach young people, science,
technology, and math. And I'm
looking here in your PhD
and I'm looking at some
of your, your energy equations
and I'm teaching my, my
11 year old algebra now,
and he's getting into quadratic
equations and stuff like that.
And I'm trying to understand
how do we take an
11 year old or a
13 year old or 15
year old, and in just
10 years, turn them into
a PhD candidate. How does
that happen? How do we
make more Corey Frasiers and
how do we, how do
we scale that? I mean,
were you doing advanced math
when you were 10 and
you had a jumpstart or
did you, was it sponsorship
and mentorship? What took you
that far? That's a, that's
a great question. And, you
know, I think you touched
on something I think is
really important for me to
say that hopefully will, will
demystify maybe the whole being
a PhD thing. And that's
that I actually don't like
math that much, this interview
is over. It's done, I'm
hitting style. I'm a heritage,
you know, but you know,
honestly, you know, beyond algebra,
I'm not really a fan
of math, but yet you
have to take one at
each new graduate degree level.
You have to make it
through that class. And I
will be honest, I made
it through those classes by
the skin of my teeth.
But the thing is, I
think that shows that, you
know, being a PhD is
there, there is no cut
formula. There is no template.
So expectation that every PhD
has all of these skill
sets that you would expect.
So not every PhD is
great at math or, or,
or joys at not every
PhD enjoys, I don't know,
chemical equations and balancing those
equations. Right. But the PhD
as, as, as a, the
nomenclature of it, and the,
the idea behind it is
that you understand enough of
the principles that you can
go in, better understand something
through investigation, through research, through
deeper diving. So you can
teach yourself or come up
with those scientific understandings by
virtue of employing whatever the
methods and principles are that
you learn. And so to
the point that you were
making about, you know, getting
your son started on, on,
on math and, and, and
certainly I know far more
advanced level of math than
anybody else, but the idea
is to get kids interested,
you've got to get them
started early. That doesn't mean
that later isn't, isn't, isn't
a good thing to do.
But the earlier you get
a child to see themselves
doing math, doing science and
interacting with people who they
know, you know, can do
this or who, or look
like them, or who sound
like them, or who have
the same interests. The more
likely they are to pursue
these careers. And the more
likely that they're going to
be resilient against obstacles in
these careers. Cause some of
the biggest challenges are for
kids is isn't that, that
they don't like math and
science. And so they don't
go into it is that
they start to see things
as a challenge from the
standpoint of, okay, these problems
were hard in this class
in science or in math.
I don't want to put
that. Or I feel embarrassed
that these other kids over
here were able to understand
this problem. And I wasn't.
So I need to now
retreat from that. Or, you
know, maybe it doesn't seem
as cool anymore. Maybe there's,
there's a societal pressure for
them to back away from
being smart. I think that's
a little bit less apparent
nowadays because nerds kind of
rule the world a little
bit more than they used
to when you are learners
will inherit the earth right
here. Right. You know, but
I think the more you
tie in their ability to
do these things and seeing
other people who, who maybe
they identify with, or maybe
they, you know, that Meyer
who were able to go
down this path it's even
better. Yeah. And to your,
to your credit, one of
the things that is a
characteristic that is that you're
known for, and I'm gonna
use one of your LinkedIn
recommendations, as an example, is
conscientiousness, meticulousness and thoughtfulness. You
don't necessarily have to be
an expert at everything, right?
If you have attention to
detail, right, my son or
my theoretical daughter doesn't have
to love math, but they
have to respect it and
know that it's a tool
and double check their work
is what the current thing,
the 11 year old is
working on right now. You
don't have to love it.
But if you double check
it, it's a tool. It's
a very powerful tool in
to be honest, that I'm
meticulousness in that approach, I
think will not only benefit
you. Some of it benefits
anybody. And I say this
all the time about, you
know, STEM or steam is
that even if you don't
go into a traditional science
or technology or mathematics based
field and you pursue something
that's more on the art
side, having technical knowledge will
help you and your art,
having an understanding of, you
know, being detailed, oriented, double-checking
understanding, seeing things through a
method, through an algorithm, you
know, in your head will
make it far easier for
you to take those things
and execute those steps in
your art. And honestly, it
helps me a lot, not
even just with engineering or
something, technical or something, or
super technical, but spreadsheets while
I'm working on spreadsheets and
I'm doing something that's a
high pressure situation for some
executive or trying to crunch
out some, some document or
something of some kind often
my ability to double check
something or see the algorithm
for how it needs to
be executed, saves me time
or makes me look really
good in front of that,
that, that executive person, because
I'm able to execute to
some kind of method. You
know, The, the thing that
I want them to understand
also is that there's so
much power in this. Like
you were talking about blowing
things up, but what you're
actually talking about is theorizing
that things will work a
certain kind of way, then
testing it and proving that
you do in fact, have
an understanding like these models,
these equations to, for lack
of a better word, they've
been proven to be factual
because we observed that they
are in fact what they
say, they are like, you
are predicting the future with
math and then proving it
by doing actual experiments. Exactly.
Be honest. That's the thing
that interested me, excuse me,
the most about working with
most the simulations and, and,
and why I was so
keen to do this project
work. When my advisor approached
me about us, because at
the end of the day,
prediction is about helping people
see around corners. And when
I start to reframe everything,
cause I was helping my
lab mates see around the
corners of what tests, what
chemical compositions should we execute
or should we go and
develop and then, you know,
test our theories on. So
that way we save time,
we save energy. We, we
save resources and I take
that same application to engineers
at Intel, where we do
thermal and structural analysis for,
you know, super computing hardware.
And I tell them that,
Hey, the reason we're doing
this prediction is not for
the sake of data and
just feeling gee whiz about,
you know, getting temperature and
all these numbers coming up
all over the place. It's
so we can help people
make decisions effectively earlier to
save costs and bring about
a better experience. Yeah. And
I suppose, I suppose if
you, if you got the
model wrong, you could waste
a year of building a
whole real thing and say,
Oh, we were, we were
off by an order of
magnitude. We missed a zero
there. You know, you gotta
tear it all down, start
over. Yeah. That, that isn't
entirely possible. Hopefully when you
have a model, you can
put it through enough tests
or put it through, through
the paces just enough so
that you can catch, you
know, a mathematical error or,
you know, some other semantic
issue, you know, that won't
affect in product. Right? Yeah.
So you were working while
you were getting your doctorate.
So you were basically commuting.
Were you working at night
and doing your doctorate in
the day? How many hours
did you, did you have
extra hours? We didn't know
about The answer is yes
to both, but yeah, I
was, I was actually working
full time in the space
program and then driving two
hours, one way from Southeast
Houston and all the way
up to call the station
to go to Texas a
and M and do, making
that commute anywhere from one
to three times a week
for about three years. And
yeah, it was a very
interesting experience. But what I
did was I, you know,
basically you hit it on
the, on, on, on the
head. I was, sometimes I
was working during the day
and then I would go
to school in the day
and it's always at night.
And then sometimes I would
wind up working at night
or on the weekends. Fortunately
my, my job was very
charitable and they were willing
to support me and the
team I had it at,
my job was willing to
support me and I would
pick up the Slack for
them when it came to
work and things like that.
So I was working both
day and night. Oh my
goodness. I was, I was
working nine to five and
going to school six to
10, although it took me,
it took me 11 years
to finish my undergraduate so
I can, I can relate.
I can't relate to the
two hour commute. My, my
commute was only 45 minutes,
but what are you doing?
And that you listen into
books on tape. What are
you doing? Cause that's wasted
time if you're not filling
your brain up. Exactly. I
would say that that those
three years are the years
where I really fell in
love with audio books. You
know, that's all I did
was listen to audio books
and, and NPR for two
hours. Yeah. I drive up
to Microsoft from Portland. It's
four hours up and about
seven hours down in audio
books, audio books and NPR,
and the occasional conference call
is definitely the way to
do it. So now I
met you at eye urban
teen while we were both
giving talks on getting kids
excited about, about STEM, other
than telling your story, how
do you, how do you
shake these children and say,
look, look at what you
can do. If you just
stick your mind to it.
If you just keep, you
know, keep the faith and
do that commute, how do
you get kids to see
that this is possible? Yeah.
You know, one of the
things I'm always telling kids,
it's like, man, you guys
live in, but obviously there
are challenges of society, but
you live in like the
most amazing time ever. Like
anything you want to do
is at your fingertips and
living in the future. Yeah.
You know, you guys almost
don't have to have imagination
anymore because you can just
make it seem like it's
actually there, whatever it is,
you know, whether it's really
good CT CDI or it's
a augmented reality or virtual
or something else, you know,
you, you, you could pretty
much say I want to
do this or I want
to see it and it
can happen. And I think
one of the things that's
really exciting for it for
a kid is, is just
using the fact that there's
so much accessibility. So if
kids have ideas for like
apps or businesses or whatever
the case may be, get
them started on it, you
know, go ahead and, and
say, Hey, here you go.
And a lot of this
stuff, you know, a lot
or a lot of opportunities
to do these things are
pretty low bar. They're almost
a free necessarily, but the
bar is pretty low to
be able to access a
lot of these things. It
just, the existence of Khan
Academy has been extraordinary for
my kids. Yeah, Yeah, exactly.
You know, how did we
learn math Before? I guess
we had paper and we
had a Tia, Tia 89
calculator was basically all we
had. Yeah. Yeah. You know,
and it's like, man, I
wish I had so many
more of these things as
a kid because I would
have certainly been able to
apply what the teacher was
telling me, you know, much
more readily and then build
a fire. My passions get
jump-started a lot quicker rather
than existing in my own
head until I got the
college for the most part,
you know, as far as
what I'm willing to do.
And so I think for
the most part that kids
need to be able to
put their hands, you know,
literally figuratively on the thing
that we're talking about when
it comes to STEM. So
I, our routine, you know,
we're, we're doing at the
summits, we're, we're doing, you
know, these, these different tests
are like in the healthcare
arena. You know, if we're
talking about preventative healthcare, we're
talking about how we're using
data analysis or AI or
something to, to help us
do better healthcare. We have
actual healthcare professionals running a
workshop. That's showing them how
this is being used. Right.
And I think kids need
to actually see that. And
if it's something regarding technology
nearby, like sneakers and sneaker
head, I'm trying to become
one I'm trying. But if
they see how, you know,
what, what does Nike do?
I believe Matthew nurse was
up there talking about what
Nike's doing with technology when
he gave his talk. But
if they could see how
technology is playing a role
in the very things that
they like, you know, then
that's what gives them that
sense of, okay. Yeah, this
is great. This is something
I should pursue because there's
other things to do when
it comes to Nike, other
than being an athlete, there's
plenty of things on the
technology side. There's, there's other
things I can do in
sports. In fact, sports is
very much dominated by data
and technology right now, whether
it's statisticians or it's, or
it's actual, you Know, performance
data, right? So it's give
them, I'm hearing, I'm hearing
applied apply to apply. Like
it's big theoretical science is
not going to light at
night for 11 year olds.
But if you tell them
like Matthew nurse, the example
you gave you the director
of the Nike sport research
lab, this is somebody who's
taking math and science and
applying it to making shoes,
to, to making, and then
ultimately making it successful. So
you gotta draw a straight
line between that, that, that
equation that my 11 years
working on, and then someone's
success. Exactly. Application. We live
in a world where, you
know, at this point, you
know, everybody has this immediate
gratification sense. So if you're
getting someone that immediate contact
and immediate touch point, it's
sticking a lot more random.
Fantastic. Well, I really appreciate
you chatting with me today,
dr. Corey Frazier, and I
appreciate you going out there
and fostering a culture of
innovation at Intel and, and
the work you did in
the space shuttle. Oh, thank
you very much, Scott. I
really appreciate you having me
on, and this is, this
has been fun. I really
enjoyed it. Alright. Thank you,
sir. I hopefully see you
again. This has been another
episode of Hanselminutes and we'll
see .